hi welcome to sociology 302 - social research methods.

my name is burrel vann jr and I will be your instructor for the course.

I am a PhD candidate here in the department of sociology. I study social movements, politics, inequality, drugs, and crime. My dissertation looks at the process of marijuana becoming legal. If any of you are interested in that, I can talk about it a little more later.


Research methods is required for the bachelors degree in sociology. how many of you in the class are taking it because it’s required? How many are taking it because you want to DO some research someday?

Nice. Well, I began just like you, a few years ago… sitting in my research methods class, not sure if I needed this class or not… cuz I didn’t know what I was gonna do beyond taking some intro sociology classes. And then, after some more methods classes, and some more social movements classes, I started to think that research itself is what I wanted to do. And now that’s what I do for a living. 

So, this class, like it did for me, will expose you to some of the foundations of social science… how to conduct research projects from the idea/conceptualization phase to the data gathering phase, to the data analysis phase, to writing up your results, 

In a longer, 10- or 16-week term, I would introduce you all to the concepts, and have you practice them. This includes coming up with solid/publishable research questions, writing a research proposal, compiling secondary data (that is, data that are representative of the population, and are collected by someone other than yourself —- such as a reputable agency like RAND, Gallup, or Pew), running analyses on your data, and completing all the sections of an article-length research paper.

However, we don’t have that much time. We have 5 weeks. In a longer class, I would treat it much like a discussion, where we go back and forth on discussing ways of collecting data, and debating whether or not the research makes sense. Instead, for such a short amount of time, I have to treat the class much like a lecture. However, when I can, I’ll work in some discussion.

If, at the end of the class you feel like you want to take the next step and develop projects of your own, feel free to come to me so that we can work out a plan for learning more about specific research methods for your areas of interests so that you can complete your own, independent research projects. 


Alright. So today will be mostly lecture. And i will try to get you out of here as soon as possible. 

Because this is a three hour class, I think that two 10-minute breaks every class (every 45-50 minutes) should help break up the time so you’re not just sitting forever.

Today, we will go over the syllabus and some of the guidelines of the class, and I will take attendance. I won’t take attendance every day, but if you want to get the information, and perhaps some hints for exams, I suggest you come. if you have questions, please feel free to ask.

Alright syllabus time.

